+++
title = "01"

+++




# SECOND ADHYĀYA

## FIRST PĀDA.

…




The same Sūtra replies 'no; because there would result the fault of want of room for other Smr̥tis.' For other Smr̥tis, that of Manu e.g., teach that Brahman is the universal cause. Thus Manu says, 'This (world) existed in the shape of darkness, and so on. Then the divine Self existent, indiscernible but making discernible all this, the great elements and the rest, appeared with irresistible power, dispelling the darkness. He, desiring to produce beings of many kinds from his own body, first with a thought created the waters, and placed his seed in them' (Manu I, 5-8). And the Bhagavad-gitā, 'I am the origin and the dissolution of the whole Universe' (VII, 6). 'I am the origin of all; everything proceeds from me' (X, 8). Similarly, in the Mahābhārata, to the question 'Whence was created this whole world with its movable and immovable beings?' the answer is given, 'Nārāyaṇa assumes the form of the world, he the infinite, eternal one'; and 'from him there originates the Unevolved consisting of the three guṇas'; and 'the Unevolved is merged in the non-acting Person.' And Parāśara says, 'From Vishṇu there sprang the world and in him it abides; he makes this world persist and he rules it--he is the world.' Thus also Āpastamba, 'The living beings are the dwelling of him who lies in all caves, who is not killed, who is spotless'; and 'From him spring all bodies; he is the primary cause, he is eternal, permanent.' (Dharmasū. I, 8, 22, 4; 23, 2).--If the question as to the meaning of the Vedānta-texts were to be settled by means of Kapila's Smr̥ti, we should have to accept the extremely undesirable conclusion that all the Smr̥tis quoted are of no authority. It is true that the Vedānta-texts are concerned with theoretical truth lying outside the sphere of Perception and the other means of knowledge, and that hence students possessing only a limited knowledge of the Veda require some help in order fully to make out the meaning of the Vedānta. But what must be avoided in this case is to give any opening for the conclusion that the very numerous

 Smr̥tis which closely follow the doctrine of the Vedānta, are composed by the most competent and trustworthy persons and aim at supporting that doctrine, are irrelevant; and it is for this reason that Kapila's Smr̥ti which contains a doctrine opposed to Scripture must be disregarded. The support required is elucidation of the sense conveyed by Scripture, and this clearly cannot be effected by means of a Smr̥ti contradicting Scripture. Nor is it of any avail to plead, as the Pūrvapakshin does, that Manu and other Smr̥tis of the same kind fulfil in any case the function of elucidating the acts of religious duty enjoined in the karmakāṇda. For if they enjoin acts of religious duty as means to win the favour of the Supreme Person but do not impress upon us the idea of that Supreme Person himself who is to be pleased by those acts, they are also not capable of impressing upon us the idea of those acts themselves. That it is the character of all religious acts to win the favour of the Supreme Spirit, Smr̥ti distinctly declares, 'Man attains to perfection by worshipping with his proper action Him from whom all Beings proceed; and by whom all this is stretched out' (Bha. Gī. XVIII, 46); 'Let a man meditate on Nārāyaṇa, the divine one, at all works, such as bathing and the like; he will then reach the world of Brahman and not return hither' (Daksha-smr̥ti); and 'Those men with whom, intent on their duties, thou art pleased, O Lord, they pass beyond all this Māya and find Release for their souls' (Vi. Pu.). Nor can it be said that Manu and similar Smr̥tis have a function in so far as setting forth works (not aiming at final Release but) bringing about certain results included in transmigratory existence, whether here on earth or in a heavenly world; for the essential character of those works also is to please the highest Person. As is said in the Bhagavad-gītā (IX, 23, 24); 'Even they who devoted to other gods worship them with faith, worship me, against ordinance. For I am the enjoyer and the Lord of all sacrifices; but they know me not in truth and hence they fall,' and 'Thou art ever worshipped by me with sacrifices; thou alone, bearing the form of

pitr̥s and of gods, enjoyest all the offerings made to either.' Nor finally can we admit the contention that it is rational to interpret the Vedánta-texts in accordance with Kapila's Smr̥ti because Kapila, in the Śvetāśvatara text, is referred to as a competent person. For from this it would follow that, as Br̥haspati is, in Śruti and Smr̥ti, mentioned as a pattern of consummate wisdom, Scripture should be interpreted in agreement with the openly materialistic and atheistic Smr̥ti composed by that authority. But, it may here be said, the Vedānta-texts should after all be interpreted in agreement with Kapila's Smr̥ti, for the reason that Kapila had through the power of his concentrated meditation (yoga) arrived at an insight into truth.--To this objection the next Sūtra replies.

