+++
full_title = ""
title = "04 None"

+++


4. That (viz. breath) (is merged) in the ruler (i.e. the individual soul), on account of the (statements as to the prāṇas) coming to it and so on.

We have ascertained that a thing which has not originated from another is not itself merged in the latter, but only through its functions. A doubt now arises whether, according to the word of scripture, the function of breath is merged in heat, or in the individual soul which is the ruler of the body and senses.

According to the pūrvapakshin we must conclude that the breath is merged in heat only, since the scriptural statement allows no room for doubt and we are not entitled to assume something not declared by scripture. The breath under discussion persists 'in the ruler,' i.e. the intelligent Self (the individual soul) which possesses nescience, work, and former knowledge as limiting adjuncts; i.e. the function of breath has that soul for its substratum.

Why so?--'On account of (the prāṇas) going towards him,' &c.

Another scriptural passage declares that all prāṇas without any difference go to the soul, 'All the prāṇas go to the Self at the time of death when a man is thus going to expire' (Br̥. Up. IV, 3, 38). Another passage again specially declares that the prāṇa with its five functions follows the individual soul, 'After him thus departing the prāṇa departs, 'and that the other prāṇas follow that prāṇa, 'And after the prāṇa thus departing all the other prāṇas depart' (Br̥. Up. IV, 4, 2). And the text, 'He is furnished with intelligence' (ibid.), by declaring the individual soul to

be of intimately intelligent nature, suggests that in it, viz. the soul, the prāṇa--into which the different organs of knowledge have been merged--has taken its abode.

But scripture also says, 'The prāṇa (is merged) in heat;' why then make the addition implied in the doctrine--that breath is merged in the individual soul?

We must make that addition, we reply, because in the process of departure &c. the soul is the chief agent, and because we must pay regard to specifications contained in other scriptural passages also.

How then do you explain the statement, 'Breath is merged in heat?'

To this question the next Sūtra replies.

