+++
full_title = ""
title = "13 None"

+++


13. If (it be objected that the term ānandamaya, consisting of bliss, can) not (denote the highest Self) on account of its being a word denoting a modification

 (or product); (we declare the objection to be) not (valid) on account of abundance, (the idea of which may be expressed by the affix maya.)

Here the pūrvapakshin raises the objection that the word ānandamaya (consisting of bliss) cannot denote the highest Self.--Why?--Because the word ānandamaya is understood to denote something different from the original word (i.e. the word ānanda without the derivative affix maya), viz. a modification; according to the received sense of the affix maya. 'Ānandamaya' therefore denotes a modification, just as annamaya (consisting of food) and similar words do.

This objection is, however, not valid, because 'maya' is also used in the sense of abundance, i.e. denotes that where there is abundance of what the original word expresses. So, for instance, the phrase 'the sacrifice is annamaya' means 'the sacrifice is abounding in food' (not 'is some modification or product of food'). Thus here Brahman also, as abounding in bliss, is called ānandamaya. That Brahman does abound in bliss follows from the passage (Taitt. Up. II, 8), where, after the bliss of each of the different classes of beings, beginning with man, has been declared to be a hundred times greater than the bliss of the immediately preceding class, the bliss of Brahman is finally proclaimed to be absolutely supreme. Maya therefore denotes abundance.

