+++
full_title = ""
title = "03 None"

+++


3. Thereby the Yoga (Smr̥ti) is refuted.

This Sūtra extends the application of the preceding argumentation, and remarks that by the refutation of the Sānkhya-smr̥ti the Yoga-smr̥ti also is to be considered as refuted; for the latter also assumes, in opposition to Scripture, a pradhāna as the independent cause of the world, and the 'great principle,' &c. as its effects, although neither the Veda nor common experience favour these views.--But, if the same reasoning applies to the Yoga also, the latter system is already disposed of by the previous arguments; of what use then is it formally to extend them to the Yoga? (as the Sūtra does.)--We reply that here an additional

cause of doubt presents itself, the practice of Yoga being enjoined in the Veda as a means of obtaining perfect knowledge; so, for instance, Br̥. Up. II, 4, 5, '(The Self) is to be heard, to be thought, to be meditated upon [^fn_264].' In the Śvetāśvatara Upanishad, moreover, we find various injunctions of Yoga-practice connected with the assumption of different positions of the body; &c.; so, for instance, 'Holding his body with its three erect parts even,' &c. (II, 8).

[^fn_264]: 297:1 In which passage the phrase 'to be meditated upon' (nididhyāsā) indicates the act of mental concentration characteristic of the Yoga.

Further, we find very many passages in the Veda which (without expressly enjoining it) point to the Yoga, as, for instance, Ka. Up. II, 6, 11, 'This, the firm holding back of the senses, is what is called Yoga;' 'Having received this knowledge and the whole rule of Yoga' (Ka. Up. II, 6, 18); and so on. And in the Yoga-śāstra itself the passage, 'Now then Yoga, the means of the knowledge of truth,' &c. defines the Yoga as a means of reaching perfect knowledge. As thus one topic of the śāstra at least (viz. the practice of Yoga) is shown to be authoritative, the entire Yoga-smr̥ti will have to be accepted as unobjectionable, just as the Smr̥ti referring to the ashṭakās [^fn_265].--To this we reply that the formal extension (to the Yoga, of the arguments primarily directed against the Sānkhya) has the purpose of removing the additional doubt stated in the above lines; for in spite of a part of the Yoga-smr̥ti being authoritative, the disagreement (between Smr̥ti and Śruti) on other topics remains as shown above.--Although [^fn_266] there are many Smr̥tis treating of the soul, we have singled out for refutation the Sānkhya and Yoga because they are widely known as offering the means for accomplishing the highest

[^fn_265]: 297:2 The ashṭakās (certain oblations to be made on the eighth days after the full moons of the seasons hemanta and śiśira) furnish the stock illustration for the doctrine of the Pūrvā Mim. that Smr̥ti is authoritative in so far as it is based on Śruti.

[^fn_266]: 297:3 But why--it will be asked--do you apply yourself to the refutation of the Sānkhya and Yoga only, and not also to that of other Smr̥tis conflicting with the Vedānta views?

end of man and have found favour with many competent persons. Moreover, their position is strengthened by a Vedic passage referring to them, 'He who has known that cause which is to be apprehended by Sānkhya and Yoga he is freed from all fetters' (Śve. Up. VI, 13). (The claims which on the ground of this last passage might be set up for the Sānkhya and Yoga-smr̥tis in their entirety) we refute by the remark that the highest beatitude (the highest aim of man) is not to be attained by the knowledge of the Sānkhya-smr̥ti irrespective of the Veda, nor by the road of Yoga-practice. For Scripture itself declares that there is no other means of obtaining the highest beatitude but the knowledge of the unity of the Self which is conveyed by the Veda, 'Over death passes only the man who knows him; there is no other path to go' (Śve. Up. Ill, 8). And the Sānkhya and Yoga-systems maintain duality, do not discern the unity of the Self. In the passage quoted ('That cause which is to be apprehended by Sānkhya and Yoga') the terms 'Sānkhya' and 'Yoga' denote Vedic knowledge and meditation, as we infer from proximity [^fn_267]. We willingly allow room for those portions of the two systems which do not contradict the Veda. In their description of the soul, for instance, as free from all qualities the Sānkhyas are in harmony with the Veda which teaches that the person (purusha) is essentially pure; cp. Br̥. Up. IV, 3, 16. 'For that person is not attached to anything.' The Yoga again in giving rules for the condition of the wandering religious mendicant admits that state of retirement from the concerns of life which is known from scriptural passages such as the following one, 'Then the parivrājaka with discoloured (yellow) dress, shaven, without any possessions,' &c. (Jābāla Upan. IV).

[^fn_267]: 298:1 I. e. from the fact of these terms being employed in a passage standing close to other passages which refer to Vedic knowledge.

The above remarks will serve as a reply to the claims of all argumentative Smr̥tis. If it be said that those Smr̥tis also assist, by argumentation and proof, the cognition of truth, we do not object to so much, but we maintain

all the same that the truth can be known from the Vedānta-texts only; as is stated by scriptural passages such as 'None who does not know the Veda perceives that great one' (Taitt. Br. III, 12, 9, 7); 'I now ask thee that person taught in the Upanishads' (Br̥. Up, III, 9, 26); and others.

